\section{Linear transformations and matrices}

\begin{remark}
  See the corresponding \textit{Essence of linear algebra} video for a more
  visual presentation (11 minutes)
  \cite{bib:linalg_linear_transformations_and_matrices}.
\end{remark}

This section focuses on what linear transformations look like in the case of two
dimensions and how they relate to the idea of a matrix-vector multiplication.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    \textcolor{red}{1} & \textcolor{orange}{-3} \\
    \textcolor{green}{2} & \textcolor{cyan}{4}
  \end{bmatrix}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    \textcolor{blue}{5} \\
    \textcolor{purple}{7}
  \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
    (\textcolor{red}{1})(\textcolor{blue}{5}) +
      (\textcolor{orange}{-3})(\textcolor{purple}{7}) \\
    (\textcolor{green}{2})(\textcolor{blue}{5}) +
      (\textcolor{cyan}{4})(\textcolor{purple}{7})
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

In particular, we want to show you a way to think about matrix-vector
multiplication that doesn't rely on memorization of the procedure shown above.

\subsection{What is a linear transformation?}
\index{Matrices!linear transformation}

To start, let's just parse this term ``linear transformation". ``Transformation"
is essentially another name for ``function". It's something that takes in inputs
and returns an output for each one. Specifically in the context of linear
algebra, we consider transformations that take in some vector and spit out
another vector.

\begin{bookfigure}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[auto, >=latex']
    % Place the nodes
    \node [name=input] {
      $\begin{bmatrix}
        5 \\
        7
      \end{bmatrix}$
    };
    \node [name=inputlabel, below=of input] {Vector input};
    \node [name=func, right=of input] {$L(\vec{v})$};
    \node [name=output, right=of func] {
      $\begin{bmatrix}
        2 \\
        -3
      \end{bmatrix}$
    };
    \node [name=outputlabel, below=of output] {Vector output};

    % Connect the nodes
    \draw [arrow] (input) -- node {} (func);
    \draw [arrow] (func) -- node {} (output);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{bookfigure}

So why use the word ``transformation" instead of ``function" if they mean the
same thing? It's to be suggestive of a certain way to visualize this
input-output relation. You see, a great way to understand functions of vectors
is to use movement. If a transformation takes some input vector to some output
vector, we imagine that input vector moving over to the output vector. Then to
understand the transformation as a whole, we might imagine watching every
possible input vector move over to its corresponding output vector. it gets
really crowded to think about all the vectors all at once, where each one is an
arrow. Therefore, as we mentioned in the previous section, it's useful to
conceptualize each vector as a single point where its tip sits rather than an
arrow. To think about a transformation taking every possible input vector to
some output vector, we watch every point in space moving to some other point.

The effect of various transformations moving around all of the points in space
gives the feeling of compressing and morphing space itself. As you can imagine
though, arbitrary transformations can look complicated. Luckily, linear algebra
limits itself to a special type of transformation, ones that are easier to
understand, called ``linear" transformations. Visually speaking, a
transformation is linear if it has two properties: all straight lines must
remain as such, and the origin must remain fixed in place. In general, you
should think of linear transformations as keeping grid lines parallel and evenly
spaced.

\subsection{Describing transformations numerically}

Some transformations are simple to think about, like rotations about the origin.
Others are more difficult to describe with words. So how could one describe
these transformations numerically? If you were, say, programming some animations
to make a video teaching the topic, what formula could you give the computer so
that if you give it the coordinates of a vector, it would return the coordinates
of where that vectors lands?

\begin{bookfigure}
  \begin{tikzpicture}[auto, >=latex']
    % Place the nodes
    \node [name=input] {
      $\begin{bmatrix}
        x_{in} \\
        y_{in}
      \end{bmatrix}$
    };
    \node [name=func, right=of input] {$????$};
    \node [name=output, right=of func] {
      $\begin{bmatrix}
        x_{out} \\
        y_{out}
      \end{bmatrix}$
    };

    % Connect the nodes
    \draw [arrow] (input) -- node {} (func);
    \draw [arrow] (func) -- node {} (output);
  \end{tikzpicture}
\end{bookfigure}

You only need to record where the two basis vectors, $\hat{i}$ and $\hat{j}$,
each land, and everything else will follow from that. For example, consider the
vector $v$ with coordinates $(-1, 2)$, meaning $\vec{v} = -1\hat{i} + 2\hat{j}$.
If we play some transformation and follow where all three of these vectors go,
the property that grid lines remain parallel and evenly spaced has a really
important consequence: the place where $\vec{v}$ lands will be $-1$ times the
vector where $\hat{i}$ landed plus $2$ times the vector where $\hat{j}$ landed.
In other words, it started off as a certain linear combination of $\hat{i}$ and
$\hat{j}$ and it ends up as that same linear combination of where those two
vectors landed. This means you can deduce where $\vec{v}$ must go based only on
where $\hat{i}$ and $\hat{j}$ each land. For this transformation, $\hat{i}$
lands on the coordinates $(1, -2)$ and $\hat{j}$ lands on the x-axis at the
coordinates $(3, 0)$.

\begin{align*}
  \text{Transformed } \vec{v} &= -1(\text{Transformed } \hat{i}) +
    2(\text{Transformed } \hat{j}) \\
  \text{Transformed } \vec{v} &= -1\begin{bmatrix}
    1 \\
    -2
  \end{bmatrix} + 2\begin{bmatrix}
    3 \\
    0
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}

Adding that all together, you can deduce that $\vec{v}$ has to land on the
vector $(5, 2)$.

\begin{align*}
  \text{Transformed } \vec{v} &= \begin{bmatrix}
    -1(1) + 2(3) \\
    -1(-2) + 2(0)
  \end{bmatrix} \\
  \text{Transformed } \vec{v} &= \begin{bmatrix}
    5 \\
    2
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}

This is a good point to pause and ponder, because it's pretty important. This
gives us a technique to deduce where any vectors land, so long as we have a
record of where $\hat{i}$ and $\hat{j}$ each land, without needing to watch the
transformation itself.

Given a vector with more general coordinates $x$ and $y$, it will land on $x$
times the vector where $\hat{i}$ lands $(1, -2)$, plus $y$ times the vector
where $\hat{j}$ lands $(3, 0)$. Carrying out that sum, you see that it lands at
$(1x + 3y, -2x + 0y)$.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{array}{cc}
    \hat{i} \rightarrow \begin{bmatrix}
      1 \\
      -2
    \end{bmatrix} &
    \hat{j} \rightarrow \begin{bmatrix}
      3 \\
      0
    \end{bmatrix}
  \end{array}
\end{equation*}

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    x \\
    y
  \end{bmatrix} \rightarrow x\begin{bmatrix}
    1 \\
    -2
  \end{bmatrix} + y\begin{bmatrix}
    3 \\
    0
  \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
    1x + 3y \\
    -2x + 0y
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

Given any vector, this formula will describe where that vector lands.

What all of this is saying is that a two dimensional linear transformation is
completely described by just four numbers: the two coordinates for where
$\hat{i}$ lands and the two coordinates for where $\hat{j}$ lands. It's common
to package these coordinates into a two-by-two grid of numbers, called a
two-by-two matrix, where you can interpret the columns as the two special
vectors where $\hat{i}$ and $\hat{j}$ each land. If $\hat{i}$ lands on the
vector $(3, -2)$ and $\hat{j}$ lands on the vector $(2, 1)$, this two-by-two
matrix would be

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    3 & 2 \\
    -2 & 1
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

If you're given a two-by-two matrix describing a linear transformation and some
specific vector, say $(5, 7)$, and you want to know where that linear
transformation takes that vector, you can multiply the coordinates of the vector
by the corresponding columns of the matrix, then add together the result.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    3 & 2 \\
    -2 & 1
  \end{bmatrix}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    5 \\
    7
  \end{bmatrix} = 5\begin{bmatrix}
    3 \\
    -2
  \end{bmatrix} + 7\begin{bmatrix}
    2 \\
    1
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

This corresponds with the idea of adding the scaled versions of our new basis
vectors.

Let's see what this looks like in the most general case where your matrix has
entries $a$, $b$, $c$, $d$.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    a & b \\
    c & d
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

Remember, this matrix is just a way of packaging the information needed to
describe a linear transformation. Always remember to interpret that first
column, $(a, c)$, as the place where the first basis vector lands and that
second column, $(b, d)$, as the place where the second basis vector lands.

When we apply this transformation to some vector $(x, y)$, the result will be
$x$ times $(a, c)$ plus $y$ times $(b, d)$. Together, this gives a vector
$(ax + by, cx + dy)$.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    a & b \\
    c & d
  \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix}
    x \\
    y
  \end{bmatrix} = x\begin{bmatrix}
    a \\
    c
  \end{bmatrix} + y\begin{bmatrix}
    b \\
    d
  \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix}
    ax + by \\
    cx + dy
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

You could even define this as matrix-vector multiplication when you put the
matrix on the left of the vector like it's a function. Then, you could make high
schoolers memorize this, without showing them the crucial part that makes it
feel intuitive (yes, that was sarcasm). Isn't it more fun to think about these
columns as the transformed versions of your basis vectors and to think about the
result as the appropriate linear combination of those vectors?

\subsection{Examples of linear transformations}

Let's practice describing a few linear transformations with matrices. For
example, if we rotate all of space $90\degree$ counterclockwise then $\hat{i}$
lands on the coordinates $(0, 1)$ and $\hat{j}$ lands on the coordinates
$(-1, 0)$. So the matrix we end up with has the columns $(0, 1)$, $(-1, 0)$.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    0 & -1 \\
    1 & 0
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

To ascertain what happens to any vector after a $90\degree$ rotation, you could
just multiply its coordinates by this matrix.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    0 & -1 \\
    1 & 0
  \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix}
    x \\
    y
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

Here's a fun transformation with a special name, called a ``shear". In it,
$\hat{i}$ remains fixed so the first column of the matrix is $(1, 0)$, but
$\hat{j}$ moves over to the coordinates $(1, 1)$ which become the second column
of the matrix.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 1 \\
    0 & 1
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

And, at the risk of being redundant here, figuring out how shear transforms a
given vector comes down to multiplying this matrix by that vector.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 1 \\
    0 & 1
  \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix}
    x \\
    y
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

Let's say we want to go the other way around, starting with a matrix, say with
columns $(1, 2)$ and $(3, 1)$, and we want to deduce what its transformation
looks like. Pause and take a moment to see if you can imagine it.

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 3 \\
    2 & 1
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

One way to do this is to first move $\hat{i}$ to $(1, 2)$. Then, move $\hat{j}$
to $(3, 1)$, always moving the rest of space in such a way that that keeps grid
lines parallel and evenly spaced.

Suppose that the vectors that $\hat{i}$ and $\hat{j}$ land on are linearly
dependent as in the following matrix (that is, it has linearly dependent
columns).

\begin{equation*}
  \begin{bmatrix}
    2 & -2 \\
    1 & -1
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{equation*}

If you recall from last section, this means that one vector is a scaled version
of the other, so that linear transformation compresses all of 2D space onto the
line where those two vectors sit. This is also known as the one-dimensional span
of those two linearly dependent vectors.

To sum up, linear transformations are a way to move around space such that the
grid lines remain parallel and evenly spaced and such that the origin remains
fixed. Delightfully, these transformations can be described using only a handful
of numbers: the coordinates of where each basis vector lands. Matrices give us a
language to describe these transformations where the columns represent those
coordinates and matrix-vector multiplication is just a way to compute what that
transformation does to a given vector. The important take-away here is that
every time you see a matrix, you can interpret it as a certain transformation of
space. Once you really digest this idea, you're in a great position to
understand linear algebra deeply. Almost all of the topics coming up, from
matrix multiplication to determinants, eigenvalues, etc. will become easier to
understand once you start thinking about matrices as transformations of space.
