\section{Structure of this book}

This book consists of five parts and a collection of appendices that address the
four tasks a controls engineer carries out: derive a model of the system
(kinematics), design a controller for the model (control theory), design an
observer to estimate the current state of the model (localization), and plan how
the controller is going to drive the model to a desired state (motion planning).

Part I, ``Classical control theory," introduces the basics of control theory,
teaches the fundamentals of PID controller design, describes what a transfer
function is, and shows how they can be used to analyze dynamical systems.
Emphasis is placed on the geometric intuition of this analysis rather than the
frequency domain math.

Part II, ``Modern control theory," first provides a crash course in the
geometric intuition behind linear algebra and covers enough of the mechanics of
evaluating matrix algebra for the reader to follow along in later chapters. It
covers state-space representation, controllability, and observability. The
intuition gained in part I and the notation of linear algebra are used to model
and control linear multiple-input, multiple-output (MIMO) systems and covers
discretization, LQR controller design, LQE observer design, and feedforwards.
Then, these concepts are applied to design and implement controllers for real
systems. The examples from part I are converted to state-space representation,
implemented, and tested with a digital controller.

Part II also introduces the basics of nonlinear control system analysis with
Lyapunov functions. It presents an example of a nonlinear controller for a
unicycle-like vehicle as well as how to apply it to a two-wheeled vehicle. Since
nonlinear control isn't the focus of this book, we mention other books and
resources for further reading.

Part III, ``Estimation and localization," introduces the field of stochastic
control theory. The Luenberger observer and the probability theory behind the
Kalman filter is taught with several examples of creative applications of Kalman
filter theory.

Part IV, ``Kinematics and dynamics," introduces the basic calculus and physics
concepts required to derive the models used in the previous chapters. It walks
through the derivations for several common FRC subsystems.

Part V, ``Motion planning," covers planning how the robot will get from its
current state to some desired state in a manner achievable by its dynamics.
Motion profiles are introduced.

The appendices provide further enrichment that isn't required for a passing
understanding of the material. This includes derivations for many of the results
presented and used in the mainmatter of the book.

The Python scripts used to generate the plots in the case studies double as
reference implementations of the techniques discussed in their respective
chapters. They are available in this book's Git repository. Its location is
listed on the copyright page.
