\chapterimage{preface.jpg}{Flower bush near Spencer's Market in Santa Maria, CA}

\chapter{Preface}

When I was a high school student on FIRST Robotics Competition (FRC) team 3512,
I had to learn control theory from scattered internet sources that either
weren't rigorous enough or assumed too much prior knowledge. After I took
graduate-level control theory courses from University of California, Santa Cruz
for my bachelor's degree, I realized that the concepts weren't difficult when
presented well, but the information wasn't broadly accessible outside academia.

I wanted to fix the information disparity so more people could appreciate the
beauty and elegance I saw in control theory. This book streamlines the learning
process to make that possible.

I wrote the initial draft of this book as a final project for an undergraduate
technical writing class I took at UCSC in Spring 2017
(\href{https://cmpe185-spring17-01.courses.soe.ucsc.edu/}{CMPE 185}). It was a
13-page IEEE-formatted paper intended as a reference manual and guide to
state-space control that summarized the three graduate controls classes I had
taken that year. I kept working on it the following year to flesh it out, and it
eventually became long enough to make into a proper book. I've been adding to it
ever since as I learn new things.

I contextualized the material within FRC because it's always been a significant
part of my life, and it's a useful application sandbox. I've since contributed
implementations of many of this book's tools to the FRC standard library
(\href{https://github.com/wpilibsuite/allwpilib}{WPILib}) and maintain them.

\section*{Acknowledgements}

Thanks to my controls engineering instructors Dejan Milutinovi\'c and Gabriel
Elkaim for introducing me to the field of control theory. They taught me what it
means to be a controls engineer, and I appreciated their classes's pragmatic
perspective focused on intuition and application.
